# Telecoms data

GeMMM makes use of origin-destination data from a major UK mobile network provider to parameterise the underlying models. This data covers a three-month period from January 1<sup>st</sup> to March 31<sup>st</sup> 2023 and comprises hourly journey counts between middle super output areas (MSOAs), or intermediate zones in Scotland. These geographical regions represent an area with a resident population of 5,000-15,000 individuals.

To construct the dataset, the locations of network users are recorded throughout the day and converted into dwells and journeys. Dwells represent periods where the user is stationary for at least 30 minutes, whilst journeys are periods of movement between dwells. For a given start MSOA, X, end MSOA, Y, and hour, h, the raw hourly origin-destination counts represent the total number of users across the network who made a journey from X to Y that started during hour h.

```{note}
The requirement that dwells must exceed 30 minutes indicates that key journeys, such as travel to and from work, are predominantly captured. The origin destination counts, and hence the output generated by GeMMM, are therefore an underestimate of the true number of journeys. Longer journeys are also likely to be under-represented, as those that include a break of at least 30 minutes will be divided into two separate journeys.
```

Since users of the network only account for a fraction of the total population, expansion factors are applied to the raw counts to make them more representative of the whole population. These expansion factors are determined by comparing the number of users of each age group and gender with resident population estimates from the Office for National Statistics. When the number of users is lower than the population estimate, the relative difference is used to scale the journey volumes of those users. These scaled origin-destination counts are then validated against external datasets, such as stadium attendance and the National Transport Survey.

For data protection purposes, the scaled origin-destination counts are averaged, with weekday averages taken over Monday to Friday and weekend averages taken across two consecutive weekends. This means that for a particular week, the weekday count at 9am is instead an average of the counts at 9am from Monday to Friday. Averaging the journey counts effectively smooths the time series. Whilst this reduces the effect of MSOA specific events that are difficult to explain, it also reduce effects from bank holidays, for example, that are present nationwide and could be modelled. Note that all of the pre-processing steps described so far were carried out by the mobile network provider prior to us receiving the data.

When parameterising the underlying models, counts from weeks beginning 2<sup>nd</sup> January and 13<sup>th</sup> and 20<sup>th</sup> February are excluded as these coincide with school holidays. During this time we expect the movement patterns to differ, but do not have sufficient data to reliably quantify this effect. (time of year)

In addition to the assumptions and caveats described above, it is worth emphasising that the data covers a three-month period during winter months and GeMMM cannot therefore describe any seasonal changes in movement patterns. Users should also consider the general limitations of mobile telecoms data, such as poorer signal in rural areas, and age and socioeconomic biases related to mobile phone ownership.


